Venice Beach California is a melting pot
of counterculture art and music it was
home to a section of the Los Angeles
beatniks and has been a heavily
dominated counterculture area since the
boardwalk has food and there are
basketball courts handball courts a
fishing pier people shops and
performance acts the famous muscle beach
is located here as is the legal graffiti
walls artists refer to these as pits
this is a term made popular in San
Francisco after the 1989 loma prieta
earthquake used to describe standalone
walls or dugout areas ideal for graffiti
pieces the graffiti walls have been a
part of Venice since graffiti started
taking hold of the west coast the first
tag was seen as early as 1960s by a man
nicknamed cornbread in the Philadelphia
area but graffiti on the west coast
started in the late 70s to early 80s in
San Francisco with writers like Cuba
from Baltimore Picasso and Dean Los
Angeles had their own graffiti style
known as cholo writing which is box-type
signatures made famous by people like
Chaz biorkis this art evolved with the
help of New York and the San Francisco
movement into the Los Angeles style many
people are familiar with today
the pits and towers at Venice Beach are
the remaining structures from the
pavilion built in 1961 although it was
always illegal to paint the walls they
were not policed and the community
embraced it the pill the pavilion was
torn down in 1999 but the walls and
tower were left up to preserve the art
on the walls the walls have been painted
as early as 1974 and are regularly
painted over each Saturday and Sunday
since 2000 when painting there became
legalized and regulated by the ICU the
ICU stands for in creative unity and was
started by stache molesky in 1992 stache
is an artist who grew up in the
haight-ashbury district of San Francisco
even though he was born in LA and moved
back there for college he graduated from
UCLA with a degree in art history he
dedicated his life to bringing socially
and artistically striking exhibitions to
the public view sin is also an artist
who regulates the walls on the weekends
sin is spelled Sen and he is also an
already respected and established
graffiti artist in the Los Angeles area
he signs out the permits and make sure
everyone has a painting planned out or a
sketch planned out before they go to a
wall he then assigns a wall to each
artist and they can paint until one half
hour before sunset he explained to us
that the paintings usually don't stay on
a wall for longer than day unless the
work that is done
is exceptional and the people respect it
and keep it up longer or if it's painted
on a Sunday since nobody is allowed to
paint on weekdays it'll be there until
the following weekend
Venice Beach is loud there's always a
lot going on there especially at the
graffiti walls events are held regularly
and range from graffiti classes and
demos to outdoor gallery exhibitions
while these now occur often they also
took place in the 1970s the exhibition's
were sanctioned and even commissioned in
some instances back then art students at
local schools would often participate in
the creation of the murals the LA Times
described the early process of choosing
mural which is done much differently
than it is today in the 1970s they
printed that the wall was completed in
three phases first the walls were
cleaned then the sketches and designs
were chosen from a coordinating
committee comprised of community
residents and finally the painting was
completed send told us that today you
sketch you show up and you paint it's
not like an art contest anymore he said
though like Sen said it isn't an art
contest anymore there is still heavy
competition which is normal in the
graffiti world big names turn out to
paint though these include saber and
space invader who also have been known
to put their work on other parts of the
Venice Boardwalk competition and the
battle for space is heavy here but
relatively peaceful despite what a
graffiti outsider might think the
competition is seen as a healthy thing
here forcing the art form to evolve and
letting the artists practice and learn
from each other the Venice graffiti
walls will remain part of California
history for years to come it is an
important landmark for American art and
freedom of speech because it is one of
the only places that graffiti art is
allowed to exist without serious
censorship they will continue to be one
more reason California is unique and
unlike any other place in the world it
will always have its opponents but the
venice art walls are here to stay
you